content/about.md, before:

---
title: About
weight: 1000
type: page
menu: true
pdf: false
---

The papers in this volume derive from the proceedings of the nineteenth International Bronze Congress, held at the Getty Center and Villa in October 2015 in connection with the exhibition *Power and Pathos: Bronze Sculpture of the Hellenistic World*. The study of large-scale ancient bronzes has long focused on aspects of technology and production. Analytical work of materials, processes, and techniques has significantly enriched our understanding of the medium. Most recently, the restoration history of bronzes has established itself as a distinct area of investigation. How does this scholarship bear on the understanding of bronzes within the wider history of ancient art? How do these technical data relate to our ideas of styles and development? How has the material itself affected ancient and modern perceptions of form, value, and status of works of art?

## Citation Information

### Chicago

Daehner, Jens M., Kenneth Lapatin, and Ambra Spinelli, eds. *Artistry in Bronze: The Greeks and Their Legacy*. Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum; Getty Conservation Institute, 2017. http://www.getty.edu/publications/artistryinbronze.

### MLA

Daehner, Jens M., Kenneth Lapatin, and Ambra Spinelli, eds. *Artistry in Bronze: The Greeks and Their Legacy*. J. Paul Getty Museum, 2017, <span class="cite-current-date">D MMMM YYYY</span>, http://www.getty.edu/publications/artistryinbronze.

### Permanent URL

http://www.getty.edu/publications/artistryinbronze

## Revision History

Any revisions or corrections made to this publication after the first edition date will be listed here and in the project repository at {{< url-link >}}http://www.github.com/gettypubs/artistryinbronze{{< /url-link >}}, where a more detailed version history is available. The revisions branch of the project repository, when present, will also show any changes currently under consideration but not yet published here.

{{< q-revision-history >}}

## Downloads

{{< q-link-list "other-formats" >}}

## Copyright

{{< q-copyright >}}

**Published by the J. Paul Getty Museum and Getty Conservation Institute, Los Angeles**<br />
Getty Publications<br />
1200 Getty Center Drive, Suite 500<br />
Los Angeles, California 90049-1682<br />
www.getty.edu/publications

{{< q-publisher-team >}}

{{< q-loc >}}

Illustration credits TK

Commit message:

Add illustration credit for front cover

content/about.md, after:

---
title: About
weight: 1000
type: page
menu: true
pdf: false
---

The papers in this volume derive from the proceedings of the nineteenth International Bronze Congress, held at the Getty Center and Villa in October 2015 in connection with the exhibition *Power and Pathos: Bronze Sculpture of the Hellenistic World*. The study of large-scale ancient bronzes has long focused on aspects of technology and production. Analytical work of materials, processes, and techniques has significantly enriched our understanding of the medium. Most recently, the restoration history of bronzes has established itself as a distinct area of investigation. How does this scholarship bear on the understanding of bronzes within the wider history of ancient art? How do these technical data relate to our ideas of styles and development? How has the material itself affected ancient and modern perceptions of form, value, and status of works of art?

## Citation Information

### Chicago

Daehner, Jens M., Kenneth Lapatin, and Ambra Spinelli, eds. *Artistry in Bronze: The Greeks and Their Legacy*. Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum; Getty Conservation Institute, 2017. http://www.getty.edu/publications/artistryinbronze.

### MLA

Daehner, Jens M., Kenneth Lapatin, and Ambra Spinelli, eds. *Artistry in Bronze: The Greeks and Their Legacy*. J. Paul Getty Museum, 2017, <span class="cite-current-date">D MMMM YYYY</span>, http://www.getty.edu/publications/artistryinbronze.

### Permanent URL

http://www.getty.edu/publications/artistryinbronze

## Revision History

Any revisions or corrections made to this publication after the first edition date will be listed here and in the project repository at {{< url-link >}}http://www.github.com/gettypubs/artistryinbronze{{< /url-link >}}, where a more detailed version history is available. The revisions branch of the project repository, when present, will also show any changes currently under consideration but not yet published here.

{{< q-revision-history >}}

## Downloads

{{< q-link-list "other-formats" >}}

## Copyright

{{< q-copyright >}}

**Published by the J. Paul Getty Museum and Getty Conservation Institute, Los Angeles**<br />
Getty Publications<br />
1200 Getty Center Drive, Suite 500<br />
Los Angeles, California 90049-1682<br />
www.getty.edu/publications

{{< q-publisher-team >}}

{{< q-loc >}}

Front cover: Herm of Dionysus (detail), 200–100 BC. Attributed to the workshop of Boëthos of Kalchedon. Bronze, copper, and stone. Malibu, J. Paul Getty Museum, Villa Collection, inv. 79.AB.138

Every effort has been made to contact the owners and photographers of objects reproduced here whose names do not appear in the captions. Anyone having further information concerning copyright holders is asked to contact Getty Publication so this information can be included.
