content/copyright.md, before:

---
title: Copyright
type: page
weight: 3
online: false
menu: false
toc: false
---

The free online edition of this book is available at {{< url-link >}}http://www.getty.edu/publications/artistryinbronze{{< /url-link >}} and includes zoomable figures and tables. Also available are free PDF, EPUB, and MOBI downloads of the book. For readers who wish to have a bound reference copy, a paperback version has also been made available for sale.

{{< q-copyright >}}

{{< q-revision-history format="short" >}}

**Published by the J. Paul Getty Museum and Getty Conservation Institute, Los Angeles**<br />
Getty Publications<br />
1200 Getty Center Drive, Suite 500<br />
Los Angeles, California 90049-1682<br />
www.getty.edu/publications

{{< q-publisher-team >}}

Distributed in the United States and Canada by the University of Chicago Press<br />
Distributed outside the United States and Canada by Yale University Press, London

Printed in the United States of America

{{< q-loc >}}

Illustration credits TK

Commit message:

Add illustration credit for front cover

content/copyright.md, after:

---
title: Copyright
type: page
weight: 3
online: false
menu: false
toc: false
---

The free online edition of this book is available at {{< url-link >}}http://www.getty.edu/publications/artistryinbronze{{< /url-link >}} and includes zoomable figures and tables. Also available are free PDF, EPUB, and MOBI downloads of the book. For readers who wish to have a bound reference copy, a paperback version has also been made available for sale.

{{< q-copyright >}}

{{< q-revision-history format="short" >}}

**Published by the J. Paul Getty Museum and Getty Conservation Institute, Los Angeles**<br />
Getty Publications<br />
1200 Getty Center Drive, Suite 500<br />
Los Angeles, California 90049-1682<br />
www.getty.edu/publications

{{< q-publisher-team >}}

Distributed in the United States and Canada by the University of Chicago Press<br />
Distributed outside the United States and Canada by Yale University Press, London

Printed in the United States of America

{{< q-loc >}}

Front cover: Herm of Dionysus (detail), 200–100 BC. Attributed to the workshop of Boëthos of Kalchedon. Bronze, copper, and stone. Malibu, J. Paul Getty Museum, Villa Collection, inv. 79.AB.138

Every effort has been made to contact the owners and photographers of objects reproduced here whose names do not appear in the captions. Anyone having further information concerning copyright holders is asked to contact Getty Publication so this information can be included.
